docs/sphinx/ttl-tutorial/kernel-basics.md, before:

# Kernel Basics

## Kernel Function

A kernel function is a Python function decorated with `@ttl.kernel()`. It constructs a `ttl.Program` object by passing up to three thread functions and returns a callable that accepts TT-NN tensors.

```python
@ttl.kernel()
def foo(x: ttnn.Tensor, y: ttnn.Tensor) -> None:
    @ttl.compute()
    def some_compute():
        # compute logic

    @ttl.datamovement()
    def some_dm0():
        # data movement logic

    @ttl.datamovement()
    def some_dm1():
        # more data movement logic

    return ttl.Program(some_compute, some_dm0, some_dm1)(x, y)

# Usage
shape = ttnn.Shape([128, 128])
x = ttnn.rand(shape, layout=ttnn.TILE_LAYOUT)
y = ttnn.zeros(shape, layout=ttnn.TILE_LAYOUT)
foo(x, y)
```

## Thread Functions

Thread functions are Python functions with no arguments, annotated by `@ttl.compute()` or `@ttl.datamovement()`. They are typically defined in the kernel function scope to capture shared objects.

**Compute threads** execute compute operations on blocks. **Data movement (DM) threads** handle memory transfers and synchronization. An analogy is a restaurant where the host program is the customer who places an order for a multi-course meal. Inside the kitchen (Tensix core), the first data movement thread acts as a worker fetching ingredients from storage, the compute thread is the cook preparing each course as soon as the ingredients are available, and the second data movement thread is the server that brings each finished course to the customer as soon as it's ready. Multiple courses move through this pipeline at once—while one dish is being plated, another is cooking, and a third is being prepped.

```{mermaid}
graph TB
    Host["Host Program<br/>(🧑 Customer)"] -->|sends input data| DRAM["DRAM/L1<br/>(🍚🐟🥒🥑 Ingredients)"]

    subgraph KernelFunction["Kernel Function on Tensix Core (Kitchen)"]
        subgraph pad[" "]
            subgraph threads[" "]
                DM1["DM Thread 1<br/>Reader (🧑🏻 Prep Cook)"]
                CT["Compute Thread<br/>(👩🏽‍🍳 Cook)"]
                DM2["DM Thread 2<br/>Writer (👧🏼 Server)"]
            end
        end
    end

    DRAM -->|reads from| DM1
    DM1 -->|writes to| CB1["Circular Buffer<br/>(🔔 Ingredients ready)"]
    CB1 -->|provides data| CT
    CT -->|writes to| CB2["Circular Buffer<br/>(🔔 Course ready)"]
    CB2 -->|provides data| DM2
    DM2 -->|writes to| DRAM2["DRAM/L1<br/>(🍱 Ready to eat course)"]
    DRAM2 -->|returns results| Host

    classDef invisible fill:none,stroke:none;
    class pad,threads invisible;
```

## Grid and Core Functions

### Grid Size

`ttl.grid_size(dims)` returns the size of the grid in the specified dimensionality. If requested dimensions differ from grid dimensions, the highest rank dimension is flattened or padded.

An analogy is an office building: a single-chip grid is one floor with an 8x8 arrangement of cubicles (cores). A 1D view counts all cubicles in a line (64 total). A multi-chip grid adds more floors, and the view can count by floor, by cubicle-within-floor, or flatten everything into one long hallway.

```python
# For (8, 8) single-chip grid
x_size = ttl.grid_size(dims=1)  # x_size = 64

# For (8, 8, 8) multi-chip grid
x_size, y_size = ttl.grid_size(dims=2)  # x_size = 8, y_size = 64

# For (8, 8) single-chip grid
x_size, y_size, z_size = ttl.grid_size(dims=3)  # x_size = 8, y_size = 8, z_size = 1
```

### Core Coordinates

`ttl.core(dims)` returns zero-based, contiguous core coordinates for the current Tensix core.

```python
# For (8, 8) single-chip grid
x = ttl.core(dims=1)  # x in [0, 64)

# For (8, 8, 8) multi-chip grid
x, y = ttl.core(dims=2)  # x in [0, 8), y in [0, 64)

# For (8, 8) single-chip grid
x, y, z = ttl.core(dims=3)  # x in [0, 8), y in [0, 8), z = 0
```

Both functions can be used inside kernel functions and thread functions.

Commit message:

Remove `return ttl.Program(...)(...)` as it's easy to infer

docs/sphinx/ttl-tutorial/kernel-basics.md, after:

# Kernel Basics

## Kernel Function

A kernel function is a Python function decorated with `@ttl.kernel()`. Thread functions defined inside are automatically collected and compiled into a program.

```python
@ttl.kernel()
def foo(x: ttnn.Tensor, y: ttnn.Tensor) -> None:
    @ttl.compute()
    def some_compute():
        # compute logic

    @ttl.datamovement()
    def some_dm0():
        # data movement logic

    @ttl.datamovement()
    def some_dm1():
        # more data movement logic

# Usage
shape = ttnn.Shape([128, 128])
x = ttnn.rand(shape, layout=ttnn.TILE_LAYOUT)
y = ttnn.zeros(shape, layout=ttnn.TILE_LAYOUT)
foo(x, y)
```

## Thread Functions

Thread functions are Python functions with no arguments, annotated by `@ttl.compute()` or `@ttl.datamovement()`. They are typically defined in the kernel function scope to capture shared objects.

**Compute threads** execute compute operations on blocks. **Data movement (DM) threads** handle memory transfers and synchronization. An analogy is a restaurant where the host program is the customer who places an order for a multi-course meal. Inside the kitchen (Tensix core), the first data movement thread acts as a worker fetching ingredients from storage, the compute thread is the cook preparing each course as soon as the ingredients are available, and the second data movement thread is the server that brings each finished course to the customer as soon as it's ready. Multiple courses move through this pipeline at once—while one dish is being plated, another is cooking, and a third is being prepped.

```{mermaid}
graph TB
    Host["Host Program<br/>(🧑 Customer)"] -->|sends input data| DRAM["DRAM/L1<br/>(🍚🐟🥒🥑 Ingredients)"]

    subgraph KernelFunction["Kernel Function on Tensix Core (Kitchen)"]
        subgraph pad[" "]
            subgraph threads[" "]
                DM1["DM Thread 1<br/>Reader (🧑🏻 Prep Cook)"]
                CT["Compute Thread<br/>(👩🏽‍🍳 Cook)"]
                DM2["DM Thread 2<br/>Writer (👧🏼 Server)"]
            end
        end
    end

    DRAM -->|reads from| DM1
    DM1 -->|writes to| CB1["Circular Buffer<br/>(🔔 Ingredients ready)"]
    CB1 -->|provides data| CT
    CT -->|writes to| CB2["Circular Buffer<br/>(🔔 Course ready)"]
    CB2 -->|provides data| DM2
    DM2 -->|writes to| DRAM2["DRAM/L1<br/>(🍱 Ready to eat course)"]
    DRAM2 -->|returns results| Host

    classDef invisible fill:none,stroke:none;
    class pad,threads invisible;
```

## Grid and Core Functions

### Grid Size

`ttl.grid_size(dims)` returns the size of the grid in the specified dimensionality. If requested dimensions differ from grid dimensions, the highest rank dimension is flattened or padded.

An analogy is an office building: a single-chip grid is one floor with an 8x8 arrangement of cubicles (cores). A 1D view counts all cubicles in a line (64 total). A multi-chip grid adds more floors, and the view can count by floor, by cubicle-within-floor, or flatten everything into one long hallway.

```python
# For (8, 8) single-chip grid
x_size = ttl.grid_size(dims=1)  # x_size = 64

# For (8, 8, 8) multi-chip grid
x_size, y_size = ttl.grid_size(dims=2)  # x_size = 8, y_size = 64

# For (8, 8) single-chip grid
x_size, y_size, z_size = ttl.grid_size(dims=3)  # x_size = 8, y_size = 8, z_size = 1
```

### Core Coordinates

`ttl.core(dims)` returns zero-based, contiguous core coordinates for the current Tensix core.

```python
# For (8, 8) single-chip grid
x = ttl.core(dims=1)  # x in [0, 64)

# For (8, 8, 8) multi-chip grid
x, y = ttl.core(dims=2)  # x in [0, 8), y in [0, 64)

# For (8, 8) single-chip grid
x, y, z = ttl.core(dims=3)  # x in [0, 8), y in [0, 8), z = 0
```

Both functions can be used inside kernel functions and thread functions.
